# Exam 1

## Initial setup

Set alias:

```bash
alias k=kubectl
```

Open [kubectl Cheat Sheet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/).

## Question 1

Write all kubeconfig context names into a single file, one per line.

Extract the certificate of one kubeconfig user and write it decoded to a new file.

## Solution 1

From the default shell:

```bash
# writes all kubeconfig context names in a file
k config get-contexts -o name > kubecontexts.txt
k config view -o jsonpath='{.contexts[*].name}' | tr ' ' '\n' > kubecontexts.txt

# extracts the certificate and decodes it to a file
k config view --raw -o jsonpath='{.users[?(@.name == "admin@k3d-hobbyfarm")].user.client-certificate-data}' | base64 --decode > usercert.txt
```

## Question 2

Falco is installed with default configuration on the first cluster node. Use it to:

* Find a _Pod_ running image `nginx` which creates unwanted package management processes inside its container.

* Find a _Pod_ running image `httpd` which modifies `/etc/passwd`.

Save the Falco logs for case 1 under `falco_case1.log` in format:

```txt
time-with-nanosconds,container-id,container-name,user-name
```

No other information should be in any line. Collect the logs for at least 30 seconds.

Afterwards remove the threats (both 1 and 2) by scaling the replicas of the _Deployments_ that control the offending _Pods_ down to 0.

## Solution 2

From the cluster node running Falco:

```bash
# checks Falco is correctly running as a service
sudo service falco status

# displays Falco configuration, in particular the output
more /etc/falco/falco.yaml

# prints latest logs
cat /var/log/syslog | grep falco | grep nginx
cat /var/log/syslog | grep falco | grep httpd

# retrieves pod name
crictl ps -id <container_id>
crictl pods -id <pod_id>

# stops Falso service to be able to run it manually with new configuration
sudo service falco stop

# finds the rule with a vi search
vi /etc/falco/falco_rules.yaml

# creates local rule file with the copied and updated rule
vi falco_rules.local.yaml

# runs Falco on this rule for 30 seconds
falco -r falco_rules.local.yaml -M 30 > falco_case1.log

# edit the deployments to update the replicas to 0
k -n team-blue scale deploy webapi --replicas 0
k -n team-purple scale deploy rating-service --replicas 0
```

## Question 3

You received a list from the DevSecOps team which performed a security investigation of the Kubernetes cluster. The list states the following about the apiserver setup:

* Accessible through a NodePort Service

Change the apiserver setup so that:

* Only accessible through a ClusterIP Service

## Solution 3

From the control plane node:

```bash
# updates Kubernetes API Server configuration
vi /etc/kubernetes/manifests/kube-apiserver.yaml
# - --kubernetes-service-node-port 31000
# + --kubernetes-service-node-port 0

# deletes the service so it is created again
k delete svc kubernetes

# checks the service has type ClusterIP
k get svc
```

## Question 4

There is _Deployment_ `container-host-hacker` in _Namespace_ `team-red` which mounts `/run/containerd` as a hostPath volume on the _Node_ where it's running. This means that the _Pod_ can access various data about other containers running on the same _Node_.

To prevent this, configure _Namespace_ `team-red` to enforce the `baseline` Pod Security Standard. Once completed, delete the _Pod_ of the Deployment mentioned above.

Check the _ReplicaSet_ events and write the event/log lines containing the reason why the _Pod_ isn't recreated into `ex4-replicaset.log`.

## Solution 4

From the default shell:

```bash
# edits the namespace to add the label
k edit ns team-red

# displays the new version
cat <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/metadata.name: team-red
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce: baseline
  name: team-red
EOF

# deletes the pod
k dekete container-host-hacker -n team-red

# get events
k events replicaset > ex4-replicaset.log
```

## Question 5

You're ask to evaluate specific settings of cluster2 against the CIS Benchmark recommendations. Use the tool kube-bench which is already installed on the nodes.

Connect using ssh cluster2-controlplane1 and ssh cluster2-node1.

On the master node ensure (correct if necessary) that the CIS recommendations are set for:

* The --profiling argument of the kube-controller-manager

* The ownership of directory /var/lib/etcd

On the worker node ensure (correct if necessary) that the CIS recommendations are set for:

* The permissions of the kubelet configuration /var/lib/kubelet/config.yaml

* The --client-ca-file argument of the kubelet

## Solution 5

TODO

## Question 6

There are four Kubernetes server binaries located at /opt/course/6/binaries. You're provided with the following verified sha512 values for these:

kube-apiserver f417c0555bc0167355589dd1afe23be9bf909bf98312b1025f12015d1b58a1c62c9908c0067a7764fa35efdac7016a9efa8711a44425dd6692906a7c283f032c

kube-controller-manager 60100cc725e91fe1a949e1b2d0474237844b5862556e25c2c655a33boa8225855ec5ee22fa4927e6c46a60d43a7c4403a27268f96fbb726307d1608b44f38a60

kube-proxy 52f9d8ad045f8eee1d689619ef8ceef2d86d50c75a6a332653240d7ba5b2a114aca056d9e513984ade24358c9662714973c1960c62a5cb37dd375631c8a614c6

kubelet 4be40f2440619e990897cf956c32800dc96c2c983bf64519854a3309fa5aa21827991559f9c44595098e27e6f2ee4d64a3fdec6baba8a177881f20e3ec61e26c

Delete those binaries that don't match with the sha512 values above.

## Solution 6

TODO

## Question 7

The Open Policy Agent and Gatekeeper have been installed to, among other things, enforce blacklisting of certain image registries. Alter the existing constraint and/or template to also blacklist images from `very-bad-registry.com`.

Test it by creating a single _Pod_ using image `very-bad-registry.com/image` in _Namespace_ `default`, it shouldn't work.

You can also verify your changes by looking at the existing Deployment `untrusted` in _Namespace_ `default`, it uses an image from the new untrusted source. The OPA contraint should throw violation messages for this one.

## Question 8

The Kubernetes Dashboard is installed in Namespace kubernetes-dashboard and is configured to:

* Allow users to "skip login"
* Allow insecure access (HTTP without authentication)
* Allow basic authentication
* Allow access from outside the cluster

You are asked to make it more secure by:

* Deny users to "skip login"
* Deny insecure access, enforce HTTPS (self signed certificates are ok for now)
* Add the --auto-generate-certificates argument
* Enforce authentication using a token (with possibility to use RBAC)
* Allow only cluster internal access

## Question 9

Some containers need to run more secure and restricted. There is an existing AppArmor profile located at `/opt/course/9/profile` for this.

* Install the AppArmor profile on _Node_ `cluster1-node1`. Connect using `ssh cluster1-node1`.
* Add label `security=apparmor` to the _Node_
* Create a _Deployment_ named `apparmor` in _Namespace_ default with:
  * One replica of image `nginx:1.19.2`
  * NodeSelector for `security=apparmor`
  * Single container named `c1` with the AppArmor profile enabled

The _Pod_ might not run properly with the profile enabled. Write the logs of the _Pod_ into `/opt/course/9/logs` so another team can work on getting the application running.

## Question 10

Team purple wants to run some of their workloads more secure. Worker node `cluster1-node2` has container engine containerd already installed and it's configured to support the runsc/gvisor runtime.

Create a _RuntimeClass_ named `gvisor` with handler `runsc`.

Create a _Pod_ that uses the _RuntimeClass_. The _Pod_ should be in _Namespace_ `team-purple`, named `gvisor-test` and of image `nginx:1.19.2`. Make sure the _Pod_ runs on `cluster1-node2`.

Write the `dmesg` output of the successfully started _Pod_ into `/opt/course/10/gvisor-test-dmesg`.

## Question 11

There is an existing Secret called `database-access` in Namespace `team-green`.

Read the complete Secret content directly from ETCD (using `etcdctl`) and store it into `/opt/course/11/etcd-secret-content`. Write the plain and decoded Secret's value of key "pass" into `/opt/course/11/database-password`.

## Question 12

You're asked to investigate a possible permission escape in Namespace `restricted`. The context authenticates as user `restricted` which has only limited permissions and shouldn't be able to read Secret values.

Try to find the password-key values of the Secrets `secret1`, `secret2` and `secret3` in Namespace `restricted`. Write the decoded plaintext values into files `/opt/course/12/secret1`, `/opt/course/12/secret2` and `/opt/course/12/secret3`.

## Question 13

There is a metadata service available at http://192.168.100.21:32000 on which Nodes can reach sensitive data, like cloud credentials for initialisation. By default, all _Pods_ in the cluster also have access to this endpoint. The DevSecOps team has asked you to restrict access to this metadata server.

In Namespace metadata-access:

* Create a NetworkPolicy named `metadata-deny` which prevents egress to `192.168.100.21` for all _Pods_ but still allows access to everything else
* Create a NetworkPolicy named `metadata-allow` which allows _Pods_ having label `role: metadata-accessor` to access endpoint `192.168.100.21`

There are existing _Pods_ in the target Namespace with which you can test your policies, but don't change their labels.

## Question 14

There are _Pods_ in Namespace `team-yellow`. A security investigation noticed that some processes running in these _Pods_ are using the Syscall `kill`, which is forbidden by a Team Yellow internal policy.

Find the offending Pod(s) and remove these by reducing the replicas of the parent Deployment to 0.

## Question 15

In Namespace `team-pink` there is an existing Nginx Ingress resources named `secure` which accepts two paths /app and /api which point to different ClusterIP Services.

From your main terminal you can connect to it using for example:

* HTTP: `curl -v http://secure-ingress.test:31080/app`

* HTTPS: `curl -kv https://secure-ingress.test:31443/app`

Right now it uses a default generated TLS certificate by the Nginx Ingress Controller.

You're asked to instead use the key and certificate provided at `/opt/course/15/tls.key` and `/opt/course/15/tls.crt`. As it's a self-signed certificate you need to use `curl -k` when connecting to it.

## Question 16

There is a Deployment `image-verify` in Namespace `team-blue` which runs image `registry.killer.sh:5000/image-verify:v1`. DevSecOps has asked you to improve this image by:

* Changing the base image to alpine:3.12
* Not installing curl
* Updating nginx to use the version constraint >=1.18.0
* Running the main process as user myuser

Do not add any new lines to the Dockerfile, just edit existing ones. The file is located at `/opt/course/16/image/Dockerfile`.

Tag your version as `v2`. You can build, tag and push using:

```bash
cd /opt/course/16/image
podman build -t registry.killer.sh:5000/image-verify:v2 .
podman run registry.killer.sh:5000/image-verify:v2 # to test your changes
podman push registry.killer.sh:5000/image-verify:v2
```

Make the Deployment use your updated image tag `v2`.

## Question 17

Audit Logging has been enabled in the cluster with an Audit Policy located at `/etc/kubernetes/audit/policy.yaml` on `cluster2-controlplane1`.

Change the configuration so that only one backup of the logs is stored.

Alter the Policy in a way that it only stores logs:

* From Secret resources, level Metadata
* From "system:nodes" userGroups, level RequestResponse

After you altered the Policy make sure to empty the log file so it only contains entries according to your changes, like using `truncate -s 0 /etc/kubernetes/audit/logs/audit.log`.

NOTE: You can use jq to render json more readable. cat data.json | jq

## Question 18

Namespace `security` contains five Secrets of type Opaque which can be considered highly confidential. The latest Incident-Prevention-Investigation revealed that ServiceAccount `p.auster` had too broad access to the cluster for some time. This SA should've never had access to any Secrets in that Namespace.

Find out which Secrets in Namespace `security` this SA did access by looking at the Audit Logs under `/opt/course/18/audit.log`.

Change the password to any new string of only those Secrets that were accessed by this SA.

NOTE: You can use jq to render json more readable. cat data.json | jq

## Question 19

The Deployment `immutable-deployment` in Namespace `team-purple` should run immutable, it's created from file `/opt/course/19/immutable-deployment.yaml`. Even after a successful break-in, it shouldn't be possible for an attacker to modify the filesystem of the running container.

Modify the Deployment in a way that no processes inside the container can modify the local filesystem, only `/tmp` directory should be writeable. Don't modify the Docker image.

Save the updated YAML under `/opt/course/19/immutable-deployment-new.yaml` and update the running Deployment.

## Question 20

The cluster is running Kubernetes `1.27.6`, update it to `1.28.2`.

Use `apt` package manager and `kubeadm` for this.

## Question 21

The Vulnerability Scanner trivy is installed on your main terminal. Use it to scan the following images for known CVEs:

* `nginx:1.16.1-alpine`
* `k8s.gcr.io/kube-apiserver:v1.18.0`
* `k8s.gcr.io/kube-controller-manager:v1.18.0`
* `docker.io/weaveworks/weave-kube:2.7.0`

Write all images that don't contain the vulnerabilities CVE-2020-10878 or CVE-2020-1967 into `/opt/course/21/good-images`.

## Question 22

The Release Engineering Team has shared some YAML manifests and Dockerfiles with you to review. The files are located under `/opt/course/22/files`.

As a container security expert, you are asked to perform a manual static analysis and find out possible security issues with respect to unwanted credential exposure. Running processes as root is of no concern in this task.

Write the filenames which have issues into `/opt/course/22/security-issues`.

NOTE: In the Dockerfile and YAML manifests, assume that the referred files, folders, secrets and volume mounts are present. Disregard syntax or logic errors.
